Elizabeth was born in London. Elizabeth is the first child of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth. Elizabeth was educated privately at home. Elizabeth's father acceded to the throne on the abdication of Elizabeth father's brother King Edward VIII in 1936. Elizabeth began to undertake public duties during the Second World War. Elizabeth served in the Auxiliary Territorial Service. Elizabeth married Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, In 1947. Elizabeth has four children: Charles, Anne, Andrew, and Edward.

When Elizabeth's father died in February 1952, Elizabeth became Head of the Commonwealth and queen regnant of seven independent Commonwealth countries: the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Pakistan, and Ceylon. Elizabeth has reigned through major constitutional changes, such as devolution in the United Kingdom, Canadian patriation, and the decolonisation of Africa. Between 1956 and 1992, the number of Elizabeth's realms varied as territories gained independence and realms, including South Africa, Pakistan, and Ceylon (renamed Sri Lanka), became republics. Elizabeth's many historic visits and meetings include a state visit to the Republic of Ireland and visits to or from five popes. Significant events have included Elizabeth's coronation in 1953 and the celebrations of Elizabeth's Silver, Golden, and Diamond Jubilees in 1977, 2002, and 2012 respectively. In 2017, Elizabeth became the first British monarch to reach a Sapphire Jubilee. Elizabeth is the longest-lived and longest-reigning British monarch . Elizabeth is the world's longest-reigning queen regnant and female head of state. Elizabeth is the oldest and longest-reigning current monarch and the longest-serving current head of state.

Elizabeth has occasionally faced republican sentiments and press criticism of the royal family, in particular after the breakdown of Elizabeth's children's marriages, Elizabeth's annus horribilis in 1992 and the death in 1997 of Elizabeth's former daughter-in-law Diana, Princess of Wales. However, support for the monarchy has consistently been and remains high, as does Elizabeth's personal popularity.